# Mariah's Pet Peeves for Legal and Academic Writing 💢

## Avoid these things

- **Adjectivitis:** Watch out for "adjectivitis," the problem where writers pepper in modifiers like "large", "very", and so on. If these change the meaning or tone in an important way, keep 'em. Else, cut 'em.
- **Buried Claim:** Make your claim simply and up front. As-is, your claim is buried, either part of a longer complex sentence or delayed until later. That's making it hard for the reader to know just what point you are trying to say, and leading you to talk about things that aren't helping you towards that claim.
- **Citations:** It's not clear what facts or ideas are from you vs. some other source, or it's clear that a citation is missing where one is needed. Be sure to cite the source of ideas every time, whether quoted or paraphrases or alluded to. If need be, you can break a complex idea from someone else into multiple sentences and use (id.) to mean (same as the previous citation). See also the [Writing Center's advice on this](https://writing.wisc.edu/handbook/assignments/quotingsources/).
- **Complexity:** Be careful with longer, complex sentences that attempt to show multiple "steps" of cause and effect at once. A complex idea does not require a complex sentence. Break it into multiple simpler sentences. And if it seems like details are missing when you do that, then trust that gut feeling: Ask yourself what the important idea is that you're trying to get at, then get at it.
- **Damage:** You do a good job of describing the harms in this case, but you aren't attending to the history of how the people affected have resisted against these kinds of harms. Only attending to the harms can, in itself, perpetuate further harm, as you're unfairly treating the population affected as always-already damaged. But they aren't! They are full persons, and it's worth considering how they themselves (or people like them in similar cases) have resisted against the kinds of damage and tensions here
- **Distill:** Distill long quotes into shorter points. There is a reason you the author want me the reader to see this quote. So, just say that point, cite, and move on.
- **Does not Follow:** Your claim does not follow from your factual premises (alone), so there is likely some of your thinking that isn't being spelt out all the way. Consider the thought experiment: assuming all of your premises are true, what is a new fact that could make your claim false? Keep spelling things out until (A) there's nothing subtantial left to critique or (B) you actually realize there's something unclear about your claim itself!
- **Examples:** Be careful not to rely on examples. These can help you think through your ideas when you're **planning**, but the **delivery** needs to get to the point faster. Once you get into examples here, what's part of your actual claim, what's part of explaining the example, and what's part of re-summing an idea, those start to get muddied, and keeping them apart eats a lot of word count.
- **Hedging:** Avoid hedging (words like "maybe", "seems", "sometimes", "like", "possible", "I think", ...) unless you have an empirical need for it, which happens rarer than you'd think. Say your point and say it direct. What did happen? What didn't happen? "Maybes" only muddy your claim.
- **History:** Don't give a vague or broadstroke summary of history or human nature. It's an unfair characterization of the world in favor of your argument, and/or it's flowery language distracting from the main points you are trying to make. If there's a quality about the world are you trying to spell out as part of your argument, just say that directly: what are the distinctions that matter, why do they matter, and how do they bear upon the case at hand?
- **Jargon:** Don't rely on technical terms when the plain language definition will do. Operating with the plain language definition directly will help bring to the surface the details that matter in your account.
- **Meaning:** Don't change the meaning of otherwise plain language terms to mean unfamiliar things, when an existing term or short illustrative example will do. Redefining terms risks making your writing inaccessible and risks you conflating their meaning as you think through your argument. Operating with plain language and clear examples directly will help bring to the surface the details that matter in your account.
- **Missing Moral Premise:** You are missing a solid moral premise, so you aren't spelling out how your claim connects back to your rock bottom assumptions about Goodness/Right/Wrong/etc.
- **Mixed Moral Theory:** You claim to use one moral theory, but then you actually apply a different theory, or you alternate between multiple theories, or you conflate multiple theories. In either case, your explanation is lacking or confusing in terms of what rock bottom assumptions about Goodness/Right/Wrong/etc. you purport to hold. Discern and apply *the* correct moral theory, say it plain, and say it direct.
- **More about Less:** Say more about less. There's details of your argument that aren't spelt out and are left to the reader to fill in.
- **Namedrop:** Don't "namedrop" other scholars as a stand-in for their ideas. That makes your writing inaccessible for readers not familiar with the body of their work, and it risks you conflating their ideas with your own. State the idea directly, cite, and move on.
- **Nose:** Don't rely on leading in with what others said. You're here to tell us the facts about X, not the fact that you *read* about X - so cut to the chase! Leading the nose also shifts the active verb from the point you are trying to make to the verb "so and so said," which can make it easy for students to half-say an idea. Tell us the point, cite, and move on.
- **Parentheticals and Rhetorical Questions:** Avoid parenthetical statements and avoid rhetorical questions. These can be helpful for rough drafting, but they complicate your structure, hide the point, make the point harder to follow, and if they were "optional" to begin with, cut them. If they do add to the argument, then say 'em plainly, work them into the larger sentence, and break that now complex sentence into a series of smaller, clearer sentences.
- **Passive Voice:** Avoid passive voice and unclear gerunds, since those almost always muddy the details of who is/was involved in the action.
- **Premise-claims:** It is not clear what is a premise and what is your claim. This makes for a sloppy "train track" for your readers to follow.
- **Pronouns:** You rely on "it"/etc. too much instead of just saying the term you mean, which led to multiple complex sentences that could have been rearranged, shortened, and combined to be snappier.
- **Redundant:** You have multiple sentences getting at the same idea. Just say what you mean and say it once!
- **Should:** Be careful with "should," "must," and the like. These can make things unclear: are you trying to describe how the world *is*, how the world morally *ought to be*, how you *expect* or *predict* something to be, how something is *required by law*, whether something is *conceivably possible*, or something else? In the kind of writing we do, it's best to stick to "is," "ought," or spell out a more precise verb.
- **Specific Case:** Narrow your focus to a specific case. Writing about a broad topic writ-large is a hard enough task for a dedicated philosopher, and we can go a long way towards understanding bigger pictures by working towards it from small cases first. If you're having trouble finding specific cases for your topic area, I recommend searching your topic area on [US Newsstream](https://www-proquest-com.ezproxy.library.wisc.edu/usnews/advanced?accountid=465). Be sure to spell AI all the way out as Artificial Intelligence when searching.
- **Spur:** Remove distracting or unfinished spurious thoughts that you don't follow-through on. Or, finish those thoughts. For example, don't say a case "raises new questions" without saying what those questions are.
- **Snark:** Avoid snark. Say your point and say it direct. What did happen? What didn't happen? Snark only muddies your claim.
- **Strawman:** Don't unfairly characterize reality and/or others' arguments so that they are in favor of your own claims. Be clear, be exact: What did happen, what didn't happen.
- **Summarizing:** You spend a lot of words summarizing the reading or related topics, and answering a question other than the one posed. Those are good ideas, maybe for a different paper
- **Thinking:** You spend a lot of words telling me your "thinking process" about the question, instead of telling me more directly your the answer to the question posed.
- **Timing:** Be clear with the timing of action verbs. Your present/past tense is not consistent, and it doesn't line up with the facts you are trying to describe, which undermines your memo goals: Clearly differentiate what action happened in the past and what action is happening now.
- **Unclear Strategy:** Your current strategy is hard to follow, and that's making it unclear or confusing to me just what you're saying exactly. Avoid talking about two concepts at once, cycling between two concepts, or conflating multiple concepts, when it could be simpler to attend to them one at a time.
- **Wall of Text:** Break this into paragraphs. Right now, it's a "wall of text" and it makes it hard to see where the "line" between the ideas are, so it's hard to see the narrative/logical "flow" that moves from A to B to C.
- **Washy:** Don't wash away the details with hand waving or vague language! Be direct, be exact.

## These are good!

- **All Aspects:** I like that you've considered many different aspects of this question! That shouldn't change!
- **Cut to the Chase:** I like that you cut straight to your claim off the bat! That shouldn't change!
- **Smooth Flow:** I like that you have a good flow from one idea to the next here! That shouldn't change!
- **Top Detail:** I like that you have snappy and direct claims to start us off; that those claims clearly provide the structure of the "narrative" that will follow; and then you spell out the content of that "narrative" in the paragraph(s) to follow! That shouldn't change!
- **Variety:** I like that you demonstrate attention to detail and variety in your writing style (long + short sentences, logical paragraphs, etc.)! That shouldn't change!
